[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A groundbreaking new study
shows the remarkable efficacy
of a brain-based treatment
for chronic back pain,
new hope for a
debilitating problem.
This is "Gaia News."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One in five Americans
suffers from chronic pain,
most often without
receiving much benefit
from invasive and
costly treatments.
The most common
type of chronic pain
is chronic back pain
in 85% of cases,
of which no physical
cause can be identified.
Dr. Yoni Ashar is a
clinical psychologist
and neuroscientist, who studies
psychological treatments
for chronic pain.
He recently led a study at the
University of Colorado Boulder
to determine whether a
psychological treatment can
eliminate chronic back pain,
something no other therapy
has ever before been
scientifically proven to do.
>> Our society predominantly
thinks about chronic pain
through a biomechanical
medical perspective.
The most common
treatments are physical,
if they're injections
or physical therapy,
something targeting the body.
But what we're
learning more and more
is that in many cases
of chronic pain,
the problem lays in
the mind or the brain,
and we now have, really,
decades of research,
both in neuroscience and
medicine and psychology,
showing that there
are a lot of changes
that happen in the brain
during chronic pain.
And then in many
cases, these can
cause the pain to persist
after an injury has healed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> An important distinction to
be made when discussing chronic
pain is between the two
types, primary and secondary.
>> In secondary chronic pain,
the pain is secondary to some
medical problem or disease.
In primary pain, the pain
is the primary problem.
It is not secondary
to anything else,
and what really is driving
it is neuroplastic changes
in the brain and
fear and avoidance.
Fear is at the heart
of chronic pain.
So pain is a danger signal.
The fundamental function of
pain is to guide a person
or an animal away from
things that are dangerous,
and when we perceive
things to be dangerous,
that can amplify or even
create this pain in our brains.
>> Dr. Ashar likens primary
chronic pain to a false alarm
stuck in the "on" position.
A technique called pain
reprocessing therapy,
or PRT, developed by pain
psychologist Alan Gordon,
seeks to silence the alarm.
>> At the heart of PRT is
learning to think and feel
differently about your pain,
and what I mean by that is, one,
thinking differently about
it, so understanding that
the causes of the pain
are non-dangerous,
reversible brain changes.
The pain is a sort
of a false alarm.
While it's totally real, it's
due to these brain pathways
that are firing that are
not accurately reflecting
the state of the body.
The second piece of PRT is
learning to feel differently
about the pain, which
what I mean by that
is learning not
to fear the pain.
And this happens on a
more emotional level,
as well, but learning
to change some
of these automatic clenching
and tightening around the pain,
learning to relax
into it because you
know that it's safe.
>> In the University
of Colorado study,
151 participants suffering from
chronic back pain underwent
four weeks of
treatment with PRT.
The results were extraordinary.
>> What we found was a really
large drop in pain intensity.
2/3 of people in
the PRT condition
were pain free or nearly
so at post-treatment,
as compared to less
than 20% of controls.
So existing
psychological treatments,
like CBT or acceptance
and commitment therapy,
generally aim to provide
modest pain reductions
and help people live more
gracefully with their pain.
They don't really try
to eliminate the pain.
That's one key thing
that makes PRT different,
is that PRT aims to
eliminate the pain because it
views the pain as being driven
by reversible brain processes.
So it can be unlearned.
>> Researchers were thrilled to
find that the results held one
year after treatment.
What are the implications
of these findings?
>> What I believe we've been
able to do in this study is
take a similar treatment
approach and show,
in a well-conducted study,
that it really works,
that you really can resolve
chronic pain with psychological
treatments.
The study shows that you
can unlearn that pain
and be pain free or nearly so.
>> Thankfully, there are
numerous therapists who are
trained in PRT and can
be readily found online.
For researchers like
Dr. Ashar, this study
is a pivotal step towards change
in the existing paradigm of how
we approach pain and providing
hard, scientific evidence
of the power of our
minds to heal our bodies.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.
[MUSIC PLAYING]